---
coding: utf-8

title: RFC6374 Synonymous Flow Labels
abbrev: RFC6374-SFL
docname: draft-bryant-mpls-rfc6374-sfl-03
wg: MPLS Working Group
category: info

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, comments]

author:
  -
       ins: S. Bryant
       name: Stewart Bryant
       org: Huawei
       email: stewart.bryant@gmail.com
  -
       ins: M. Chen
       name: Mach Chen
       org: Huawei
       email: mach.chen@huawei.com
  -
       ins: Z. Li
       name: Zhenbin Li
       org: Huawei
       email: lizhenbin@huawei.com
  -
       ins: G. Swallow
       name: George Swallow
       org: Cisco Systems
       email: swallow.ietf@gmail.com
  -
       ins: S. Sivabalan
       name: Siva Sivabalan
       org: Cisco Systems
       email: msiva@cisco.com
  -
       ins: G. Mirsky
       name: Gregory Mirsky
       org: Ericsson
       email: gregory.mirsky@eicsson.com
  -
       ins: G. Fioccola
       name: Giuseppe Fioccola
       org: Telecom Italia
       email: giuseppe.fioccola@telecomitalia.it


normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC3032:
  RFC7876:
  RFC5586:
  RFC3032:

informative:
  I-D.bryant-mpls-sfl-control:
  I-D.chen-ippm-coloring-based-ipfpm-framework:
  I-D.bryant-mpls-sfl-framework:
  I-D.ietf-mpls-flow-ident:
  I-D.tempia-ippm-p3m:
  RFC6374:
  RFC3270:
  I-D.ietf-ippm-alt-mark:
  
--- abstract

This document describes a method of making RFC6374 performance measurements
on flows carried over an MPLS Label Switched path.  This
allows loss and delay measurements to be made on multi-point to point LSPs
and allows the measurement of flows within an MPLS construct using
RFC6374.

--- middle

# Introduction

{{I-D.ietf-mpls-flow-ident}} describes the requirement for introducing
flow identities when using RFC6374 {{RFC6374}} packet Loss Measurements
(LM).  In summary RFC6374 uses the loss-measurement (LM) packet as the
packet accounting
demarcation point.  Unfortunately this gives rise to a number of
problems that may lead to significant packet accounting errors in
certain situations.  For example:

1.  Where a flow is subjected to Equal Cost Multi-Path (ECMP)
    treatment packets can arrive out of order with respect to the LM
    packet.

2.  Where a flow is subjected to ECMP treatment, packets can arrive
    at different hardware interfaces, thus requiring reception of an
    LM packet on one interface to trigger a packet accounting action
    on a different interface which may not be co-located with it.
    This is a difficult technical problem to address with the
    required degree of accuracy.

3.  Even where there is no ECMP (for example on RSVP-TE, MPLS-TP LSPs
    and PWs) local processing may be distributed over a number of
    processor cores, leading to synchronization problems.

4.  Link aggregation techniques may also lead to synchronization
    issues.

5.  Some forwarder implementations have a long pipeline between
    processing a packet and incrementing the associated counter again
    leading to synchronization difficulties.

An approach to mitigating these synchronization issue is described in
{{I-D.tempia-ippm-p3m}} and
{{I-D.chen-ippm-coloring-based-ipfpm-framework}} in which packets are
batched by the sender and each batch is marked in some way such that
adjacent batches can be easily recognized by the receiver.

An additional problem arises where the LSP is a multi-point to point
LSP, since MPLS does not include a source address in the packet.
Network management operations require the measurement of packet loss
between a source and destination.  It is thus necessary to introduce
some source specific information into the packet to identify packet
batches from a specific source.

{{I-D.bryant-mpls-sfl-framework}} describes a method of encoding per flow
instructions in an MPLS label stack using a technique called
Synonymous Flow Labels (SFL) in which labels which mimic the
behaviour of other labels provide the packet batch identifiers and
enable the per batch packet accounting.  This memo specifies how SFLs
are used to perform RFC6374 packet loss and RFC6374 delay measurements.

# Requirements Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
{{RFC2119}}.

# RFC6374 Packet Loss Measurement with SFL

The data service packets of the flow being instrumented are grouped
into batches, and all the packets within a batch are marked with
the  SFL {{I-D.ietf-mpls-flow-ident}} corresponding to that batch.
The sender counts the number of packets in the batch. When the
batch has completed and the sender is confident that all of the
packets in that batch will have been received, the sender issues
an RFC6374 Query message to determine the number actually
received and hence the number of packets lost. The RFC6374
Query message is sent using the same SFL as the co-responding batch of
data service packets. The format of the Query and Response packet is
described in {{RFC6374SFL}}.

# RFC6374 Single Packet Delay Measurement {#SPD}

RFC6374 describes how to measure the packet delay by measuring the
transit time of an RFC6374 packet over an LSP. The format of an
RFC6374 packet carried over the LSP using an SFL is shown in {{RFC6374SFL}}.

Such a packet may not need to be carried over an SFL
since the delay over a particular LSP should be a function of the
TC bits. However if label inferred scheduling is used {{RFC3270}} then
the SFL would be REQUIRED to ensure that the RFC6374 packet
which was being used as a proxy for a data service packet experienced
a representative delay.

# Data Service Packet Delay Measurement

Where it is desired to more thoroughly instrument a packet flow and to
determine the delay of a number of packets it is undesirable to
send a large number of RFC6374 packets acting as proxy data service
packets {{SPD}}. A method of directly measuring the delay characteristics
of a batch of packets is therefore needed.

Given the long intervals over which it is necessary to measure packet
loss, it is not necessarily the case that the batch times for the two
measurement types would be identical. This it is proposed that the two
measurements are relatively independent. The notion that they are relatively
independent arises for the potential for the two batches to overlap in time,
in which case either the delay batch time will need to be cut short or the loss
time will need to be extended to allow correct reconciliation of the
various counters.

The problem is illustrated in {{FIGDM}} below:


    (1) AAAAAAAAAABBBBBBBBBBAAAAAAAAAABBBBBBBBBB

     SFL Marking of a packet batch for loss measurement

    (2) AADDDDAAAABBBBBBBBBBAAAAAAAAAABBBBBBBBBB

     SFL Marking of a subset if the packets for delay

    (3) AAAAAAAADDDDBBBBBBBBAAAAAAAAAABBBBBBBBBB

     SFL Marking of a subset of the packets across a
     packet loss measurement boundary

    (4) AACDCDCDAABBBBBBBBBBAAAAAAAAAABBBBBBBBBB

     The case of multiple delay measurements within
     a packet loss measurement
{: #FIGDM title="RFC6734 Query Packet with SFL"}

In case 1 of {{FIGDM}} we show the case were loss measurement alone
is being carried out on the flow under analysis. For illustrative
purposes consider that in the time interval being analyzed, 10
packets always flow.

Now consider case 2 of {{FIGDM}} where a small batch of
packets need to analyzed for delay. These are marked with a different
SFL type indicating that they are to be monitored for both loss
and delay. The SFL=A indicates loss batch A, SFL=D indicates a batch
of packets that are to be instrumented for delay, but SFL D is
synonymous with SFL A, which in turn is synonymous with the underlying
FEC. Thus a packet marked D will be accumulated into the A loss
batch, into the delay statistics and will be forwarded as normal.
Whether the packet is actually counted twice (for loss and delay)
or whether the two counters are reconciled during reporting is
a local matter.

Now consider case 3 of {{FIGDM}} where a small batch of packets
are marked for delay across a loss batch boundary. These packets
need to considered as part of batch A or a part of batch B, and
any RFC6374 Query needs to take place after all the packets
A or D (which ever option is chosen) have arrived at the receiving LSR.


Now consider case 4 of {{FIGDM}}. Here we have a case where
it is required to take a number of delay measurements within
a batch of packets that we are measuring for loss. To do this
we need two SFLs for delay (C and D) and alternate between
them (on a delay batch by delay batch basis) for the purposes of
measuring the delay characteristics of the different batches of packets.

# Some Simplifying Rules

It is possible to construct a large set of overlapping measurement
type, in terms of loss, delay, loss and delay and batch overlap. If
we allow all combination of cases, this leads to configuration,
testing and implementation complexity and hence increased operation
and capital cost. The following simplifying rules represent the
default case:

1. Any system that needs to measure delay MUST be able to
   measure loss.

2. Any system that is to measure delay MUST be configured to
   measure loss. Whether the loss statistics are collected
   or not is a local matter.

3. A delay measurement MAY start at any point during a loss measurement
   batch, subject to rule 4.

4. A delay measurement interval MUST be short enough that it
   will complete before the enclosing loss batch completes.

5. The duration of a second delay (D in {{FIGDM}} batch must be such
   that all packets from the packets belonging to a first
   delay batch (C in {{FIGDM}})will have been received before
   the second delay batch completes.

Given that the sender controls both the start and duration of
a loss and a delay packet batch, these rules are readily implemented
in the control plane.

# Multiple Packet Delay Characteristics

A number of methods are described. The expectation is that the MPLS WG
possibly with the assistance of the IPPM WG will select one or maybe
more than one of these methods for standardization.

Three Methods are discussed:

1. Time Buckets
2. Classic Standard Deviation
3. Average Delay

## Method 1: Time Buckets

In this method the receiving LSR measures the inter-packet gap, classifies the
delay into a number of delay buckets and records the number of packets
in each bucket. As an example, if the operator were concerned about packets with
a delay of up to 1us, 2us, 4us, 8us, and over 8us then there would be five buckets
and packets that arrived up to 1us would cause the 1us bucket counter to increase,
between 1us and 2us the 2us bucket counter would increase etc. In practice it
might be better in terms of processing and potential parallelism if, when a packet had
a delay relative to its predecessor of 2us both the up to 1us and the 2us counter
were incremented and any more detailed information was calculated in the analytics
system.

This method allows the operator to see more structure in the jitter characteristics
than simply measuring the average jitter, and avoids the complication of needing
to perform a per packet multiply, but will probably need to time intervals between
buckets to be programmable by the operator.


The packet format of an RFC6374 Bucket Jitter Measurement Message
is shown below:

     0                   1                   2                   3
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |Version| Flags |  Control Code |        Message Length         |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |  QTF  |  RTF  | RPTF  |              Reserved                 |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                       Session Identifier          |    DS     |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | Number of     |      Reserved                                 |
    | Buckets       |                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                   Interval in 10ns units                      |
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                   Number pkts in Bucket                       |
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    ~                                                               ~
    ~                                                               ~
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    ~                                                               ~
    ~                           TLV Block                           ~
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
{: #FIGBucket title="Bucket Jitter Measurement Message Format"}

The Version, Flags, Control Code, Message Length, QTF, RTF, RPTF,
Session Identifier, and DS Fields are as defined in section 3.7
of RFC6374. The remaining fields are as follows:

    o Number of Buckets in the measurement

    o Reserved must be sent as zero and ignored on receipt

    o Interval in 10ns units is the inter-packet interval for
      this bucket

    o Number Pkts in Bucket is the number of packets found in
      this bucket.

There will be a number of Interval/Number pairs depending on the
number of buckets being specified by the Querier. If an RFC6374
message is being used to configure the buckets, the Responder
MUST respond with 0 packets in each bucket until it has been
configured for a full measurement period (i.e. it was configured
at the time of the last response message). Out of band configuration
is permitted by this mode of operation.

Note this is a departure from the normal fixed format used in
RFC6374. We need to establish if this is problematic or not. 

This RFC6374 message is carried over an LSP in the way described in
{{RFC6374}} and over an LSP with an SFL as described in {{RFC6374SFL}}.


## Method 2 Classic Standard Deviation

In this method, provision is made for reporting the following delay
characteristics:

1. Number of packets in the batch (n).
2. Sum of delays in a batch (S)
3. Maximum Delay.
4. Minimum Delay.
5. Sum of squares of Inter-packet delay (SS).

Characteristic's 1 and 2 give the mean delay. Measuring the delay of each
pair in the batch is discussed in {{PPDM}}.

Characteristics 3 and 4 give the outliers.

Characteristics 1, 2 and 5 can be used to calculate the variance of the
inter-packet gap and hence the standard deviation giving a view of
the distribution of packet delays and hence the jitter. The equation
for the variance (var) is given by:

    var = (SS - S*S/n)/(n-1) 

There is some concern over the use of this algorithm for measuring
variance, because SS and S*S/n can be similar numbers, particularly
where variance is low. However the method commends it self by not
requiring a division in the hardware. A future version of this document
will look at using improved statistical methods such as the assumed mean.

## Per Packet Delay Measurement {#PPDM}

If detailed packet delay measurement is required then it might be
possible to record the inter-packet gap for each packet pair. In other
that exception cases of slow flows or small batch sizes, this would
create a large demand on storage in the instrumentation system,
bandwidth to such a storage system and bandwidth to the analytics
system. Such a measurement technique is outside the scope of this
document.

### RFC6374 Multi-Packet Delay Measurement Message Format

The packet format of an RFC6374 Multi-Packet Delay Measurement Message
is shown below:

     0                   1                   2                   3
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |Version| Flags |  Control Code |        Message Length         |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |  QTF  |  RTF  | RPTF  |              Reserved                 |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                       Session Identifier          |    DS     |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                      Number of Packets                        |
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                   Sum of Delays for Batch                     |
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                       Minimum Delay                           |
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                       Maximum Delay                           |
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                Sum of squares of Inter-packet delay           |
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    ~                                                               ~
    ~                           TLV Block                           ~
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
{: #FIGMPM title="Multi-packet Delay Measurement Message Format"}

The Version, Flags, Control Code, Message Length, QTF, RTF, RPTF,
Session Identifier, and DS Fields are as defined in section 3.7
of RFC6374. The remaining fields are as follows:

    o Number of Packets is the number of packets in this batch

    o Sum of Delays for Batch is the duration of the batch in the
      time measurement format specified in the RTF field.

    o Minimum Delay is the minimum inter-packet gap observed during
      the batch in the time format specified in the RTF field.

    o Maximum Delay is the maximum inter-packet gap observed during
      the batch in the time format specified in the RTF field.

This RFC6374 message is carried over an LSP in the way described in
{{RFC6374}} and over an LSP with an SFL as described in {{RFC6374SFL}}.

## Average Delay

Introduced in {{I-D.ietf-ippm-alt-mark}} is the concept of a one
way delay measurement in which the average time of arrival of a
set of packets is measured. In this approach the packet is time-stamped
at arrival and the Responder returns the sum of the time-stamps
and the number of times-tamps. From this the analytics engine can
determine the mean delay. An alternative model is that the Responder
returns the time stamp of the first and last packet and the
number of packets. This method has the advantage of allowing the
average delay to be determined at a number of points along the
packet path and allowing the components of the delay to be
characterized.

The packet format of an RFC6374 Average Delay Measurement Message
is shown below:

     0                   1                   2                   3
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |Version| Flags |  Control Code |        Message Length         |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |  QTF  |  RTF  | RPTF  |              Reserved                 |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                       Session Identifier          |    DS     |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                      Number of Packets                        |
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                      Time of First Packet                     |
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                      Time of Last Packet                      |
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                   Sum of Timestamps of Batch                  |
    |                                                               |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    
    ~                                                               ~
    ~                           TLV Block                           ~
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
{: #FIGAD title="Average Delay Measurement Message Format"}

The Version, Flags, Control Code, Message Length, QTF, RTF, RPTF,
Session Identifier, and DS Fields are as defined in section 3.7
of RFC6374. The remaining fields are as follows:

    o Number of Packets is the number of packets in this batch.

    o Time of First Packet is the time of arrival of the first
      packet in the batch.

    o Time of Last Packet is the time of arrival of the last
      packet in the batch.
      
    o Sum of Timestamps of Batch. 

This RFC6374 message is carried over an LSP in the way described in
{{RFC6374}} and over an LSP with an SFL as described in {{RFC6374SFL}}


# Sampled Measurement

In the discussion so far it has been assumed that we would measure
the delay characteristics of every packet in a delay measurement
interval defined by an SL of constant colour.
In {{I-D.ietf-ippm-alt-mark}} the concept of a sampled
measurement is considered. That is the Responder only measures a packet
at the start of a group of packets being marked for delay measurement
by a particular colour, rather than every packet in the marked batch.
A measurement
interval is not defined by the duration of a marked batch of packets
but the interval between a pair of RFC6374 packets taking a readout
of the delay characteristic. This approach has the advantage that
the measurement is not impacted by ECMP effects.

# Carrying RFC6374 Packets over an LSP using an SFL {#RFC6374SFL}

The packet format of an RFC6374 Query message using SFLs is shown in
{{Figure1}}.


    +-------------------------------+
    |                               |
    |             LSP               |
    |            Label              |
    +-------------------------------+
    |                               |
    |        Synonymous Flow        |
    |            Label              |
    +-------------------------------+
    |                               |
    |            GAL                |
    |                               |
    +-------------------------------+
    |                               |
    |      ACH Type = 0xA           |
    |                               |
    +-------------------------------+
    |                               |
    |  RFC6374 Measurement Message  |
    |                               |
    |  +-------------------------+  |
    |  |                         |  |
    |  |     RFC6374 Fixed       |  |
    |  |     Header              |  |
    |  |                         |  |
    |  +-------------------------+  |
    |  |                         |  |
    |  |      Optional SFL TLV   |  |
    |  |                         |  |
    |  +-------------------------+  |
    |  |                         |  |
    |  |      Optional Return    |  |
    |  |      Information        |  |
    |  |                         |  |
    |  +-------------------------+  |
    |                               |
    +-------------------------------+
{: #Figure1 title="RFC6734 Query Packet with SFL"}

The MPLS label stack is exactly the same as that used for the user
data service packets being instrumented except for the inclusion
of the GAL {{RFC5586}} to allow the receiver to distinguish between
normal data packets and OAM packets. Since the packet loss
measurements are being made on the data service packets,
an RFC6374 direct loss measurement is being made,
and which is indicated by the type field in the ACH (Type = 0x000A).

The RFC6374 measurement message consists of the three components,
the RFC6374 fixed header as specified in {{RFC6374}} carried over
the ACH channel type specified the type of measurement being
made (currently: loss, delay or loss and delay) as specified in RFC6374.

Two optional TLVs MAY also be carried if needed.  The first is the
SFL TLV specified in {{sfltlv}}.  This is used to provide the
implementation with a reminder of the SFL that was used to carry the
RFC6374 message.  This is needed because a number of MPLS
implementations do not provide the MPLS label stack to the MPLS OAM
handler.  This TLV is required if RFC6374 messages are sent over UDP
{{RFC7876}}.  This TLV MUST be included unless, by some method outside
the scope of this document, it is known that this information is not
needed by the RFC6374 Responder.

The second set of information that may be needed is the return
information that allows the responder send the RFC6374 response to
the Querier.  This is not needed if the response is requested in-band
and the MPLS construct being measured is a point to point LSP, but
otherwise MUST be carried.  The return address TLV is defined in
RFC6378 and the optional UDP Return Object is defined in {{RFC7876}}.

## RFC6374 SFL TLV {#sfltlv}

Editor's Note we need to review the following in the light of
further thoughts on the associated signaling protocol(s).  I am
fairly confident that we need all the fields other than SFL Batch and
SFL Index.  The Index is useful in order to map between the label and
information associated with the FEC.  The batch is part of the
lifetime management process.

The required RFC6374 SFL TLV is shown in {{Figure2}}.  This contains the
SFL that was carried in the label stack, the FEC that was used to
allocate the SFL and the index into the batch of SLs that were
allocated for the FEC that corresponds to this SFL.

     0                   1                   2                   3
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |    Type       |    Length     |MBZ| SFL Batch |    SFL Index  |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                 SFL                   |        Reserved       |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                 FEC                                           |
    .                                                               .
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
{: #Figure2 title="SFL TLV"}

Where:

    Type      Type is set to Synonymous Flow Label (SFL-TLV).

    Length    The length of the TLV as specified in RFC6374.

    MBZ       MUST be sent as zero and ignored on receive.

    SFL Batch The SFL batch that this SFL was allocated as part
              of see [I-D.bryant-mpls-sfl-control]

    SPL Index The index into the list of SFLs that were assigned
              against the FEC that corresponds to the SFL.

    SFL       The SFL used to deliver this packet.  This is an MPLS
              label which is a component of a label stack entry as
              defined in Section 2.1 of [RFC3032].

    Reserved  MUST be sent as zero and ignored on receive.

    FEC       The Forwarding Equivalence Class that was used to
              request this SFL.  This is encoded as per
              Section 3.4.1 of TBD

This information is needed to allow for operation with hardware that
discards the MPLS label stack before passing the remainder of the
stack to the OAM handler.  By providing both the SFL and the FEC plus
index into the array of allocated SFLs a number of implementation
types are supported.

# RFC6374 Combined Loss-Delay Measurement

This mode of operation is not currently supported by this specification.

# Privacy Considerations

The inclusion of originating and/or flow information in a packet
provides more identity information and hence potentially degrades the
privacy of the communication.  Whilst the inclusion of the additional
granularity does allow greater insight into the flow characteristics
it does not specifically identify which node originated the packet
other than by inspection of the network at the point of ingress, or
inspection of the control protocol packets.  This privacy threat may
be mitigated by encrypting the control protocol packets, regularly
changing the synonymous labels and by concurrently using a number of
such labels.

# Security Considerations

The issue noted in Section 5 is a security consideration.  There are
no other new security issues associated with the MPLS dataplane.  Any
control protocol used to request SFLs will need to ensure the
legitimacy of the request.

# IANA Considerations

## Allocation of PW Associated Channel Type

As per the IANA considerations in {{RFC5586}}, IANA is requested to
allocate the following Channel Type in the "PW Associated Channel Type"
registry:

    Value  Description                    TLV Follows  Reference
    -----  -----------------------------  -----------  ---------
    TBD    Description MPLS Multi-Packet  No           This 
           Delay Measurement


## MPLS Loss/Delay TLV Object

IANA is request to allocate a new TLV from the 0-127 range on the
MPLS Loss/Delay Measurement TLV Object Registry:

      Type Description                       Reference
      ---- --------------------------------- ---------
      TBD  Synonymous Flow Label             This

A value of 4 is recommended.



