---
coding: utf-8

title: RFC6374 Synonymous Flow Labels
abbrev: RFC6374-SFL
docname: draft-bryant-mpls-rfc6374-sfl-02
wg: MPLS Working Group
category: info

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, comments]

author:
  -
       ins: S. Bryant
       name: Stewart Bryant
       org: Huawei
       email: stewart.bryant@gmail.com
  -
       ins: M. Chen
       name: Mach Chen
       org: Huawei
       email: mach.chen@huawei.com
  -
       ins: Z. Li
       name: Zhenbin Li
       org: Huawei
       email: lizhenbin@huawei.com
  -
       ins: G. Swallow
       name: George Swallow
       org: Cisco Systems
       email: swallow@cisco.com
  -
       ins: S. Sivabalan
       name: Siva Sivabalan
       org: Cisco Systems
       email: msiva@cisco.com
  -
       ins: G. Mirsky
       name: Gregory Mirsky
       org: Ericsson
       email: gregory.mirsky@eicsson.com


normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC3032:
  RFC7876:

informative:
  I-D.bryant-mpls-sfl-control:
  I-D.chen-ippm-coloring-based-ipfpm-framework:
  I-D.bryant-mpls-sfl-framework:
  I-D.ietf-mpls-flow-ident:
  I-D.tempia-ippm-p3m:
  RFC6374:


--- abstract

This document describes a method of providing flow identification
information when making RFC6374 performance measurements.  This
allows RFC6374 measurements to be made on multi-point to point LSPs
and allows the measurement of flows within an MPLS construct using
RFC6374.


--- middle

# Introduction

{{I-D.ietf-mpls-flow-ident}} describes the requirement for introducing
flow identities when using RFC6374 {{RFC6374}} packet Loss Measurements
(LM).  In summary RFC6374 uses the LM packet as the packet accounting
demarcation point.  Unfortunately this gives rise to a number of
problems that may lead to significant packet accounting errors in
certain situations.  For example:

1.  Where a flow is subjected to Equal Cost Multi-Path (ECMP)
    treatment packets can arrive out of order with respect to the LM
    packet.

2.  Where a flow is subjected to ECMP treatment, packets can arrive
    at different hardware interfaces, thus requiring reception of an
    LM packet on one interface to trigger a packet accounting action
    on a different interface which may not be co-located with it.
    This is a difficult technical problem to address with the
    required degree of accuracy.

3.  Even where there is no ECMP (for example on RSVP-TE, MPLS-TP LSPs
    and PWs) local processing may be distributed over a number of
    processor cores, leading to synchronization problems.

4.  Link aggregation techniques may also lead to synchronization
    issues.

5.  Some forwarder implementations have a long pipeline between
    processing a packet and incrementing the associated counter again
    leading to synchronization difficulties.

An approach to mitigating these synchronization issue is described in
{{I-D.tempia-ippm-p3m}} and
{{I-D.chen-ippm-coloring-based-ipfpm-framework}} in which packets are
batched by the sender and each batch is marked in some way such that
adjacent batches can be easily recognized by the receiver.

An additional problem arises where the LSP is a multi-point to point
LSP, since MPLS does not include a source address in the packet.
Network management operations require the measurement of packet loss
between a source and destination.  It is thus necessary to introduce
some source specific information into the packet to identify packet
batches from a specific source.

{{I-D.bryant-mpls-sfl-framework}} specifies a method of encoding per flow
instructions in an MPLS label stack using a technique called
Synonymous Flow Labels (SFL) in which labels which mimic the
behaviour of other labels provide the packet batch identifiers and
enable the per batch packet accounting.  This memo specifies how SFLs
are used to perform RFC6374 performance measurements.

# Requirements Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
{{RFC2119}}.

# RFC6374 Packet Loss Measurement with SFL

The packet format of an RFC6374 Query message using SFLs is shown in
{{Figure1}}.


    +-------------------------------+
    |                               |
    |             LSP               |
    |            Label              |
    +-------------------------------+
    |                               |
    |        Synonymous Flow        |
    |            Label              |
    +-------------------------------+
    |                               |
    |                               |
    |  RFC6374 Measurement Message  |
    |                               |
    |  +-------------------------+  |
    |  |                         |  |
    |  |     RFC6374 Fixed       |  |
    |  |     Header              |  |
    |  |                         |  |
    |  +-------------------------+  |
    |  |                         |  |
    |  |      Optional SFL TLV   |  |
    |  |                         |  |
    |  +-------------------------+  |
    |  |                         |  |
    |  |      Optional Return    |  |
    |  |      Information        |  |
    |  |                         |  |
    |  +-------------------------+  |
    |                               |
    +-------------------------------+
{: #Figure1 title="RFC6734 Query Packet with SFL"}

The MPLS label stack is exactly the same as that used for the user
data service packets being instrumented except for the replacement of
the appropriate label with an SFL . The RFC6374 measurement message
consists of the three components, the RFC6374 fixed header as
specified in [RFC6374] carried over the ACH channel type specified
the type of measurement being made (currently: loss, delay or loss
and delay) as specified in RFC6374.

Two optional TLVs MAY also be carried if needed.  The first is the
SFL TLV specified in {{sfltlv}}.  This is used to provide the
implementation with a reminder of the SFL that was used to carry the
RFC6374 message.  This is needed because a number of MPLS
implementations do not provide the MPLS label stack to the MPLS OAM
handler.  This TLV is required if RFC6374 messages are sent over UDP
{{RFC7876}}.  This TLV MUST be included unless, by some method outside
the scope of this document, it is known that this information is not
needed by the RFC6374 Responder.

The second set of information that may be needed is the return
information that allows the responder send the RFC6374 response to
the Querier.  This is not needed if the response is requested in-band
and the MPLS construct being measured is a point to point LSP, but
otherwise MUST be carried.  The return address TLV is defined in
RFC6378 and the optional UDP Return Object is defined in {{RFC7876}}.

## RFC6374 SFL TLV {#sfltlv}

\[Editor's Note we need to review the following in the light of
further thoughts on the associated signaling protocol(s).  I am
fairly confident that we need all the fields other than SFL Batch and
SFL Index.  The Index is useful in order to map between the label and
information associated with the FEC.  The batch is part of the
lifetime management process.\]

The required RFC6374 SFL TLV is shown in {{Figure2}}.  This contains the
SFL that was carried in the label stack, the FEC that was used to
allocate the SFL and the index into the batch of SLs that were
allocated for the FEC that corresponds to this SFL.

     0                   1                   2                   3
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |    Type       |    Length     |MBZ| SFL Batch |    SFL Index  |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                 SFL                   |        Reserved       |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                 FEC                                           |
    .                                                               .
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
{: #Figure2 title="SFL TLV"}

Where:

    Type      Type is set to Synonymous Flow Label (SFL-TLV).

    Length    The length of the TLV as specified in RFC6374.

    MBZ       MUST be sent as zero and ignored on receive.

    SFL Batch The SFL batch that this SFL was allocated as part
              of see [I-D.bryant-mpls-sfl-control]

    SPL Index The index into the list of SFLs that were assigned
              against the FEC that corresponds to the SFL.

    SFL       The SFL used to deliver this packet.  This is an MPLS
              label which is a component of a label stack entry as
              defined in Section 2.1 of [RFC3032].

    Reserved  MUST be sent as zero and ignored on receive.

    FEC       The Forwarding Equivalence Class that was used to
              request this SFL.  This is encoded as per
              Section 3.4.1 of TBD

This information is needed to allow for operation with hardware that
discards the MPLS label stack before passing the remainder of the
stack to the OAM handler.  By providing both the SFL and the FEC plus
index into the array of allocated SFLs a number of implementation
types are supported.

# The Application of SFL to other PM Types

SFL can be used to enable other types of PM in addition to loss.
Delay, Delay Variation and Throughput may be calculated based on
measurement results collected through Loss and Delay Measurement test
sessions.  Further details will be provided in a future version of
this draft.

# Privacy Considerations

The inclusion of originating and/or flow information in a packet
provides more identity information and hence potentially degrades the
privacy of the communication.  Whilst the inclusion of the additional
granularity does allow greater insight into the flow characteristics
it does not specifically identify which node originated the packet
other than by inspection of the network at the point of ingress, or
inspection of the control protocol packets.  This privacy threat may
be mitigated by encrypting the control protocol packets, regularly
changing the synonymous labels and by concurrently using a number of
such labels.

# Security Considerations

The issue noted in Section 5 is a security consideration.  There are
no other new security issues associated with the MPLS dataplane.  Any
control protocol used to request SFLs will need to ensure the
legitimacy of the request.

# IANA Considerations

IANA is request to allocate a new TLV from the 0-127 range on the
MPLS Loss/Delay Measurement TLV Object Registry:

      Type Description                       Reference
      ---- --------------------------------- ---------
      TBD  Synonymous Flow Label             This

A value of 4 is recommended.

