---
coding: utf-8

title: Synchronisation of Network Parameters
abbrev: Parameter Sync
docname: draft-bryant-rtgwg-param-sync-00
category: std

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, comments]

author:
  -
       ins: S. Bryant
       name: Stewart Bryant
       org: Huawei Technologies
       email: stewart.bryant@gmail.com
  -
       ins: A. Atlas
       name: Alia Atlas
       org: Juniper Networks
       email: akatlas@gmail.com
  -
       ins: C. Bowers
       name: Chris Bowers
       org: Juniper Networks
       email: cbowers@juniper.net


normative:
#        - rfc2119
#        - rfc4971
  RFC2119:
  RFC4971:

informative:
#        - rfc5714
#        - rfc5715
#        - rfc7812
  RFC5714:
  RFC5715:
  RFC7812:

--- abstract

This document describes a mechanism for a link state routing protocol
to coordinate the value of a network-wide parameter. The document
also defines the solution to one specific case: the agreement
of a common convergence timer value for use in network convergence.

--- middle

# Introduction

There exist use cases where it desirable for a network to use a common
value for a parameter across all nodes. In the past, these use cases
have been addressed by setting the parameter to a constant value in the protocol
definition itself, or by requiring that the same value of the parameter 
be configured at every node.

Setting the parameter to a constant value in the protocol definition makes it 
very difficult to change the parameter, since a change would require 
formal modification to the protocol. In practice, such a change is impractical,
so the constant value needs to be chosen conservatively.   This may impose
a fundamental restriction on the eventual use of the protocol.

Manual or "static" configuration of the parameter is fraught for two reasons.
First, it is always difficult to ensure that the correct value is installed
in all of the routers.  Second, if any change is introduced into
the network that results in a need to change the value (for example
due to a change in hardware or software version) then all of the
routers need to be reconfigured to use the new parameter value.

This document describes a protocol extension that propagates a
parameter throughout the flooding domain. The method of choosing 
between one or more different advertised values, the flooding scope, and
the action to be taken when the parameter changes MUST be provided in 
the definition of the parameter type.

This document also creates one parameter type: Convergence Timer intended
for use in IP Fast-reroute applications {{RFC5714}} {{RFC5715}}.


# Requirements Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 {{RFC2119}}.


# Mechanism

The following mechanism is specified.

A new information element is introduced into the routing protocol that 
specifies the parameter. Each router is expected to advertise a specific 
value of the parameter, which that router determines based mainly on 
considerations local to that router. In general, different routers in 
the flooding domain will advertise different values of the parameter.

A router receiving the parameter values advertised by all routers in 
the flooding domain will use a well-defined method to select the 
operational value of the parameter that it uses in the running of the 
protocol. All routers MUST use the same method applied to the same set 
of advertised parameter values. All routers SHALL therefore choose the 
same operational value for the parameter. 

Note the operational value for the parameter selected SHOULD NOT 
directly affect the value for the parameter advertised a router.

The method of selecting from a range of advertised parameter values MUST 
be provided in the parameter definition. 

The definition of the parameter MUST specify the action to be
taken when a new parameter value is advertised that would cause
a change in the selected value.

The definition of the parameter MUST specify the action to be
taken in the legacy/migration case, where not all routers advertise
the parameter.

# Protocol Details

This section describes the protocol extensions needed to implement this
functionality.

## ISIS

A new Network Wide Parameter (NWP) sub-TLV is introduced into the IS-IS 
Router CAPABILITY TLV (TLV \#242 defined in [RFC4971]). The setting of 
the S-bit in TLV \#242 (indicating whether the parameter should be leaked 
between levels) MUST be included in the specific NWP definition. 

        Network Wide Parameter Sub-TLV
        TYPE: <TBD>
        Length: As defined by parameter definition.

            Sub-sub-TLV
            NWP Type: (16 bits) as defined in NWP Registry
            NWP Value: As defined by parameter definition

## OSPF

THIS NEEDS CHECKING OVER BY AN OSPF EXPERT

A new OSPF Router Information LSA TLV is defined. This may
be carried in a type 10 or type 11 OSPF Opaque LSA depending
on the required flooding scope.

        Network Wide Parameter TLV
        TYPE: <TBD>
        Length: As defined by parameter definition.

            Sub-TLV
            NWP Type: (16 bits) as defined in NWP Registry
            NWP Value: As defined by parameter definition


# Convergence Time

Routers running a fast-reroute mechanism such as Maximally Redundant
Tree (MRT) {{RFC7812}} fast re-route
require a network wide convergence time value so that 
know how long they need continue using the repair path before it is safe
to use the base path. This time is set to be the worst case time that
any router will take to calculate the new topology, and to make the
necessary changes to the FIB. 

The time taken by a router to complete each phase of the
transition will be dependent on the size of the network and the
design and implementation of the router.  It can therefore be
expected that the optimum delay will need to be tuned from time to
time as the network evolves.

## Required Properties

The Convergence Time mechanism MUST have the following properties:

    o The operational convergence delay time MUST be consistent among 
      all routers that are converging on the new topology.

    o The operational convergence delay time MUST be the highest delay 
      time advertised  by any router in the new topology.

    o The mechanism MUST increase the delay when a new router in
      introduced to the network that requires a higher delay than 
      is currently in use.

    o When the router that had the longest delay requirements is
      removed from the topology, the convergence delay timer 
      value MUST, within some reasonable time, be reduced to 
      the longest delay required by the remaining routers.

    o It MUST be possible for a router to change the 
      convergence delay timer value that it requires.

    o A router which is in multiple routing areas, or is running
      multiple routing protocols MAY signal a different loop-free
      convergence delay for each area.

How a router determines the time that it needs to execute each
convergence phase is an implementation issue, and outside the scope
of this specification.  However a router that dynamically determines
its proposed delay value must do so in such a way that it does not
cause the synchronized value to continually fluctuate.

## Definition of the Convergence Timer 

The NWP value  is 16 bits and is specified in milliseconds; this gives 
a maximum value of about 65s.

The NWP value selected is the largest value advertised.

If a routing protocol message is issued that changes the
Convergence Timer value,  but does not change the topology, 
the new timer value MUST be taken into consideration during 
the next network transition, but MUST NOT instigate a 
new transition.

If a routing protocol message is issued that changes both the Convergence
Timer value and the topology, a transition is
instigated and the new timer value MUST be taken into consideration.

The convergence mechanism MUST specify the action to be
taken if a timer change (only) message and a topology change message
are independently generated during the hold-off time.

All routers that support controlled convergence MUST advertise
an NWP specifying their required Convergence Time.

If the parameter is carried in ISIS the S-bit is set to zero indicating
that the Convergence Timer NWP MUST NOT be leaked between levels.

If the parameter is carried in OSPF it is only carried in a type
10 Opaque LSA which prevents propagation outside the OSPF area.

# IANA considerations

## ISIS 

IANA is requested to allocate a new Sub-TLVs for TLV 242 
from the IS-IS TLV Codepoints name space.

    Value    Description                 Reference 
    ----------------------------------------------
    TBD      Network Wide Parameter      This Document

## OSPF

IANA is requested to allocate a new OSPF Router Information (RI) TLV
from the Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) Parameters name space

    Value      TLV Name                  Reference
    --------------------------------------------------
    TBD        Network Wide Parameter    This document

A value in the range 12 to 32767 is requested.

## Network Wide Parameter

IANA is requested to create a new Network Wide Parameter Registry
within its own name space, and to allocate one value from it.

    Value        Name                      Reference
    ------------------------------------------------
    0            Reserved                  This document
    1            Convergence Timer         This document
    2..65535     Reserved                  This document

Allocations within this registry require documentation of
the use of the allocated value and approval by the Designated 
Expert assigned by the IESG.


# Security Considerations

The introduction of this parameter advertizing mechanism does
not introduce a significant vulnerability into the base routing 
protocol and is secured in exactly the same way as the other
TLVs that are carried. 

A rouge router deliberately introducing an anomalous parameter
value is just as capable of introducing many other anomalies
into the routing domain.

As far as possible, care should be taken to validate that the 
parameter is reasonable.

In the specific case of the Convergence Time NWP, the following
considerations apply.

If an abnormally large timer value is proposed by a router, the there
is a danger that the convergence process will take an
excessive time.  If during that time the routing protocol signals the
need for another transition, the transition will be
abandoned and the default best case (traditional) convergence
mechanism used.

The maximum value that can be specified in the LSP/LSA is limited 
through the use of a 16 bit field to about 65 seconds. 

# Contributing Authors

    Mike Shand
    Independent
    mike@mshand.org.uk
