---
coding: utf-8

title: Network Slicing - Introductory Document and Revised Problem Statement 
abbrev: NS Intro and PS
docname: draft-gdmb-netslices-intro-and-ps-00
wg: No Working Group
category: info

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, comments]

author:
  -
       ins: A. Galis
       name: Alex Galis
       org: University College London
       email: a.galis@ucl.ac.uk
  -
       ins: J. Dong
       name: Jie Dong
       org: Huawei Technologies
       email: jie.dong@huawei.com
  -
       ins: K. Makhijani
       name: Kiran Makhijani
       org: Huawei Technologies
       email: kiran.makhijani@huawei.com
  -
       ins: S. Bryant
       name: Stewart Bryant
       org: Huawei Technologies
       email: stewart.bryant@gmail.com

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC4364:
  I-D.dong-network-slicing-problem-statement:
  I-D.galis-anima-autonomic-slice-networking:
  I-D.leeking-actn-problem-statement:
  IETF-Slicing1:
    target: https://www.dropbox.com/s/ax2ofdwygjema8z/0-Network%20Slicing%20Side%20Meeting%20Introduction_IETF97.pdf 
    title: Presentations - Network Slicing meeting at IETF 97 of 15th November 2016
  IETF-Slicing2:
    target: https://www.dropbox.com/s/k2or6sd0ddzrc6c/1-Network%20Slicing%20Problem%20Statement_IETF97.pdf
    title: Presentations - Network Slicing meeting at IETF 97 of 15th November 2016
  IETF-Slicing3:
    target: https://www.dropbox.com/s/g8zvfvbrtkysjs1/2-Autonomic%20Slice%20Networking_IETF97.pdf
    title: Presentations - Network Slicing meeting at IETF 97 of 15th November 2016
  IETF-Slicing4:
    target: https://www.dropbox.com/s/d3rk4pjeg552ilv/3-Architecture%20for%20delivering%20multicast%20mobility%20services%20using%20network%20slicing_IETF97.pdf
    title: Presentations - Network Slicing meeting at IETF 97 of 15th November 2016
  IETF-Slicing5:
    target: https://www.dropbox.com/s/e3isn1bxwwhaw8g/4-ACTN%20and%20network%20slicing_IETF97.pdf
    title: Presentations - Network Slicing meeting at IETF 97 of 15th November 2016

informative:
  IMT2020-2015:
     target: http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/focusgroups/imt-2020/Pages/default.aspx
     title: Report on Gap Analysis 
     date: December 2015
     seriesinfo:
       "ITU-T FG IMT2020"
  IMT2020-2016:
     target: http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/focusgroups/imt-2020/Pages/default.aspx
     title: Draft Technical Report Application of network softwarization to IMT-2020 (O-041) 
     date: December 2016
     seriesinfo:
       "ITU-T FG IMT2020"
  MANO-2014:
     target: http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/NFV-MAN/001_099/001/01.01.01_60/gs_nfv-man001v010101p.pdf
     title:  Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV); Management and Orchestration v1.1.1.  
     date: December 2014
     seriesinfo:
       "ETSI European Telecommunications Standards Institute."
  ChinaCom-2009:
    target: http://www.chinacom.org/2009/index.html
    title: A. Galis et al - Management and Service-aware Networking Architectures (MANA) for Future Internet - Invited paper IEEE 2009 Fourth International Conference on Communications and Networking in China (ChinaCom09) 26-28 August 2009, Xi'an, China
  GENI-2009:
     target: http://groups.geni.net/geni/wiki/GENIConcepts
     title: GENI Key Concepts - Global Environment for Network Innovations (GENI) 
  IMT2020-2016bis:
     target: http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/focusgroups/imt-2020/Pages/default.aspx
     title: Draft Terms and definitions for IMT-2020 in ITU-T (O-040) 
     date: December 2016
     seriesinfo: 
       "ITU-T FG IMT2020"
  NGMN-2016:
     target: https://www.ngmn.org/uploads/media/160113_Network_Slicing_v1_0.pdf
     title: Hedmar,P., Mschner, K., et al - Description of Network Slicing Concept
     date: January 2016
     seriesinfo:
       "NGMN Alliance NGS-3GPP-2016" 
  NGS-3GPP-2016:
     target: http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/tsg_sa/WG2_Arch/Latest_SA2_Specs/Latest_draft_S2_Specs 
     title: Study on Architecture for Next Generation System - latest version v1.0.2 
     date: September 2016
  ONF-2016:
     target: https://www.opennetworking.org/images/stories/downloads/sdn-resources/technical-reports/Applying_SDN_Architecture_to_5G_Slicing_TR-526.pdf
     title: Paul, M, Schallen, S., Betts, M., Hood, D., Shirazipor, M., Lopes, D., Kaippallimalit, J., - Open Network Fundation document "Applying SDN Architecture to 5G Slicing
     date: April 2016.
     seriesinfo: 
        "Open Network Fundation"
  GUERZONI-2016:
     target: onlinelibrary.eiley.com/10.1002/ett.3084/pdf
     title: Guerzoni, R., Vaishnavi,I.,Perez-Caparros, D., Galis, A., et al Analysis of End-to-End Multi Domain Management and Orchestration Frameworks for Software Defined Infrastructures - an Architectural Survey
     date: June 2016
  KARL-2016:
     target: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ett.3084/full
     title: Karl, H., Peuster, M, Galis, A., et al DevOps for Network Function Virtualization - An Architectural Approach
     date: July 2016

--- abstract

This documents represents an introduction to the motivation and Network 
Slicing problems and work ares. It represents an initial revision of 
Network Slicing problem statement derived from the analysis of the 
technical gaps in IETF protocols ecosystem. It complements and it bring 
together the isolated efforts being carried out in several IETF working 
groups to achieve certain aspects of network slice functions and operations.

--- middle

# Introduction

Network slicing (NS) refers to the managed partitions of physical and/or 
virtual network resources, network physical/virtual and service functions 
that can act as an independent instance of a network and/or as a network 
cloud. Network resources include connectivity, compute and storage 
resources.

Slices considerably transform the networking perspective by abstracting, 
isolating, orchestrating, softwarizing and separating logical network 
components from the underlying physical network resources and as such 
they enhance Internet architecture.

For slice creation, the management plane creates the grouping of 
physical and virtual network resources, connects with the physical 
and virtual network and service functions as appropriate and it instantiates 
all the network and service functions assigned to the slice. On the other 
hand for slice operations the slice control takes over the control and 
governing of all the network resources, network functions and service 
functions assigned to the slice, and (re-) configure them as appropriate 
and as per elasticity needs in order to provide an end-to-end service.
 
Network operators can exploit NS to significantly reduce operations 
expenditures, and enable softwarization, programmability and the 
innovation necessary to enrich the offered services. Network 
softwarization techniques {{IMT2020-2015}}, {{IMT2020-2016}} may 
be used to realised and manage {{MANO-2014}} network slicing. NS 
provides the means for the network operators to provide network 
programmable capabilities to OTT providers and other market players 
without changing their physical infrastructure. NS enables the 
concurrent deployment of multiple logical, self-contained and 
independent, shared or partitioned networks on a common infrastructure. 
Slices support also dynamic multi-services, multi-tenancy and the 
integration means for vertical market players.

The purpose of NS work in IETF is to develop a set of protocols and/or protocol 
extensions that enable efficient slice creation, activation / deactivation, 
composition, elasticity, orchestration, management, isolation, guaranteed 
SLA and safe operations within a network or network cloud / data centre 
environment that assumes an IP and/or MPLS-based underlay.

While there are, isolated efforts being carried out in several IETF 
working groups DETNET,
{{I-D.leeking-actn-problem-statement}}, 
{{I-D.dong-network-slicing-problem-statement}}, 
{{I-D.galis-anima-autonomic-slice-networking}}, 
{{IETF-Slicing1}},
{{IETF-Slicing2}},
{{IETF-Slicing3}},
{{IETF-Slicing4}},
{{IETF-Slicing5}}
to achieve certain aspects of network slice functions and operations, there is a 
clear need to look at complete life-cycle management characteristics of network 
Slicing solutions though the discussions based on the following 
architectural tenets:

o Underlay tenet: support for an IP/MPLS-based underlay data plane 
the transport network used to carry that underlay.

o Governance tenet: a logically centralized authority for network 
slices in a domain.

o Separation tenet: slices are independent and have appropriate 
degree of isolation (1) from each other.

o Capability exposure tenet: each slice allows third parties to 
access via APIs information regarding services provided by the 
slice (e.g. connectivity information, QoS, mobility, autonomicity, 
etc.) within the limits set by the operator.

NS approaches that do not adhere to these tenets are explicitly outside 
of the scope of the proposed work at IETF.

In pursuit of the solutions described above, there is a need to document 
an architecture for network slicing within both wide area network and 
a data center environments.

Elicitation of requirements ({{RFC2119}}, {{RFC4364}}) for a 
network slice control and management planes and will be needed facilitating 
the selection, extension, and/or development of the protocol for each 
of the functional interfaces identified to support the architecture. 

Additionally, documentation on the common use-cases for slice validation 
for 5G is needed (e.g. mission-critical ultra-low latency communication 
services; massive-connectivity machine communication services - smart metering,
smart grid and sensor networks; extreme QoS; Independent operations and 
management; Independent cost and/or energy optimisation; Independent 
multi-topology routing; multi-tenant operations, etc.).

The proposed NS work would be co-ordinated with other IETF WGs (e.g. 
TEAS WG, DETNET WG, ANIMA WG, NETCONF WG, SUPA WG, NVO3 WG, Routing Area 
WG (RTGWG), Network Management Research Group (NMRG) and NFV Research Group 
(NFVRG)) to ensure that the commonalities and differences in solutions 
are properly considered. Where suitable protocols, models or methods exist, 
they will be preferred over creating new ones.

## Notes

(1) This issue require efficient interaction between an upper layer in 
the hierarchy and a lower layer for QoS guaranties and most of the 
operations on slicing.

# Suggested Problems and Work Areas

The goal of this work is to develop one or more protocol specifications 
(or extensions to existing protocols) to address the following problem 
areas. These problems were selected according to the analysis of the 
technical gaps in IETF protocols ecosystem.

o Uniform Reference Model for Network Slicing; Describe all 
      elements and instances of a network slice. Describe shared 
      non-sliced network parts.

o Slice Templates: Design the slices to different scenarios 
      ({{ChinaCom-2009}}, {{GENI-2009}}, {{IMT2020-2016bis}}, 
      {{NGMN-2016}}, {{NGS-3GPP-2016}}, {{ONF-2016}}); an appropriate slice 
      template definition that may include capability exposure of managed 
      partitions of physical and/or virtual network resources (i.e. 
      connectivity, compute and storage resources), physical and/or virtual 
      network and service functions that can act as an independent network 
      and/or as a network cloud.

o Network slice expected capabilities (i.e. prioritization may be needed):

        * Four-dimensional efficient slice isolation with guarantees for 
          isolation in Data / Control / Management / Service planes. 
          Enablers for safe and efficient multi-tenancy in slices.

        * Methods to guarantee the end-to-end QoS of a slice.

        * Recursion - methods for NS segmentation allowing a slicing 
          hierarchy with parent child relationships.

        * Efficiency in slicing: realize diverse requirements without 
          re-engineering the infrastructure.

        * Customized security mechanisms per slice.

        * Enablers to manage the trade-offs between flexibility and 
          efficiency in slicing.

        * Optimisation - methods for network resources automatic 
          acquisition, global resource view formed; global energy view 
          formed; Network Slice deployed based on global resource 
          and energy efficiency; Mapping algorithms.

        * Monitoring status and behaviour of NS in a single and/or 
          muti-domain environment.

        * Capability exposure for slices; APIs for slices.

        * Programmability and openness of network slices. 

o Network slice operations (i.e. prioritization may be needed):

        * Slice creation: slices in access, core and transport 
          networks; slices in data centres, slices in edge clouds.

        * Slice life cycle management including creation, 
          activation/ deactivation, protection (2) , elasticity (3), 
          extensibility (4) , safety (5) , Sizing and 
          scalability of the slicing model per network and 
          per network cloud.
 
        * Autonomic slice management and operation (i.e. self-configuration, 
          self-composition, self-monitoring, self-optimisation, 
          self-elasticity are carried as part of the slice protocols).

        * Slice stitching / composition: Enablers for efficient stitching / 
          composition/ decomposition of slices:

            - vertically (service + management + control planes) and/or 
            - horizontally (between different domains part of access, 
              core, edge segments) and /or 
            - vertically + horizontally.

        * E2E wireline network segments and network clouds orchestration 
          of slices ([GUERZONI-2016], [KARL-2016]).
 
        * Service Mapping: Dynamic Mapping of Services to slices; YANG 
          models for slices.

o Efficient enablers for Integration of above capabilities and operations.

## Notes

(2) Protection refers to the related mechanisms so that events within one slice, 
such as congestion, do not have a negative impact on another slice.

(3) Elasticity refers to the mechanisms and triggers for the growth /shrinking 
of network resources, network and service functions.

(4) Extensibility refers to the ability to expand a NS with additional 
functionality and/or characteristics or through modification of existing 
functionality/characteristics, while minimizing impact to existing functions.

(5) Safety refers to the conditions of being protected against different 
types and the consequences of failure, error harm or any other event, 
which could be considered non-desirable.

{{GUERZONI-2016}} {{KARL-2016}}

# Documents 

The following are the proposed / expected / resulting documents with 
priority (I) or (II) (i.e. revised prioritization may be needed):

o Agreed work plan

o Slice template and reference model to IESG (Informational)

o Slice life-cycle management model to IESG (Informational)

o Requirements for a network slice control and management planes.

o Common use-cases for slice validation for 5G

o (I) Slice template and reference model.

o (I) Four dimensional efficient slice isolation with guarantees for isolation in Data/ Control/ Management/ Service planes.

o (II) Methods to guarantee the end-to-end QoS of a slice.

o (I) YANG data model for slicing.

o (I) E2E orchestration of slices.

o (II) Customized security mechanisms per slice.

o (I) Slice stitching / composition: enablers for efficient stitch / composition / decomposition of slices vertically, horizontally and vertically + horizontally


# Security Considerations

Security will be a major part of the design of network slicing.

# IANA Considerations

This document requests no IANA actions.

# Acknowledgements

Thanks to Sheng Jiang (Huawei Technologies) for reviewing this draft.


