---
coding: utf-8

title: Network Slicing Architecture
abbrev: Netslice arch
docname: draft-bryant-netslice-architecture-00
wg: Network Working Group
category: info

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, comments]

author:
  -
       ins: S. Bryant
       name: Stewart Bryant
       org: Huawei Technologies
       email: stewart.bryant@gmail.com
  -
       ins: J. Dong
       name: Jie Dong
       org: Huawei Technologies
       email: jie.dong@huawei.com


normative:
  RFC2119:

informative:
  
--- abstract

This document defines the IETF architecture of network slicing.
Where possible this is based on existing IETF protocols and
IETF protocols under development.

Network slicing is a method whereby a customer buys the use
of an isolated network with communications and compute resource dedicated
to their own needs, where this is a virtual network which is
part of a larger network that is shared amongst many such customers.
A network slice is further characterised by the ability of the 
customer to modify their requirements on the fly and have their
network slice dynamically and automatially re-provisioned to meet
their current needs.

--- middle

# Introduction 

This document defines the IETF architecture of network slicing.
It is written from the perspective of the network provides
connectivity and services to the 5G Radio Area Network (RAN).

Network slicing is a method whereby a customer buys the use
of an isolated network with communications and compute resource dedicated
to their own needs, where this is a virtual network which is
part of a larger network that is shared amongst many such customers.
A network slice is further characterised by the ability of the 
customer to modify their requirements on the fly and have their
network slice dynamically and automatially re-provisioned to meet
their current needs.

Where possible existing IETF protocols are used. Where 
there is a need to enhance those protocols, or where new protocols
are required these are (will be) identified.


# Requirements Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
{{RFC2119}}.

# Definition Terms

# Objectives of Network Slicing

This section provides an overview of the objectives of network slicing to 
provide context for the network slicing architecture.
 
## Service Diversity

The Internet has always been designed to support a diverse set of
services.  However the aims of 5G stretch this diversity in a number
of dimensions. 5G aims to provide an enhanced mobile Broadband (eMBB)
service, providing the user with the network services needed to
support high definition (HD) video, virtual reality (VR), augmented
reality (AR) and tighter integration between fixed and mobile
services known as fixed mobile convergence (FMC).  High bandwidth is
not a particular challenge in the Internet, although guaranteed on-
demand high bandwidth is more of a challenge.  In addition, providing
high bandwidth with low packet loss with at least one of the hosts
highly mobile is a challenge that requires technical consideration.

Some of the services that are envisioned for 5G such as vehicular
control, be that the co-ordination of self driving cars or the
control of airborne devices such as drones falls into the Ultra-
Reliable and Low Latency Communications (uRLLC) service type.  Most
Internet protocols are designed around a best effort, or enhanced
best effort paradigm, although recent work on deterministic
networking aims to improve the situation by providing a ceiling on
latency and a significant improvement in packet loss rate for
deterministic services.  Two considerations make this achieving end-
to-end low latency especially challenging, firstly the air (radio)
interface takes a large fraction of the latency budget, leaving
little latency budget for the transport network, which in turn has
stringent latency requirements placed on it.  Secondly the added
dimension of end-point mobility to support 5G further stretches these
requirements.

The Internet of things brings with it the concept of massive Machine Type 
Communications (mMTC). This results in communications device densities and population
sizes that exceed those to which the core Internet protocols were originally
designed to support.

Economy of scale, a driver of the economic success of the Internet, leads 
us in the direction of trying to amortized the network and its infrastructure 
across this diverse set of requirements, but the extent of the diversity is 
such that one size does not fit all.

The purpose of network slicing is to amortized as much we can, without 
compromising on the critical performance requirements needed by the 
application requirements, by providing a bespoke or pseudo-bespoke 
network to each application domain over a common infrastructure (network
compute and storage).

## Guaranteed Performance

There are exacting latency demands required to service the needs
of a number of target applications. 
As an example, augmented reality, which has professional applications, requires
high bandwidth to provide a local video feed to the augmenter, and high 
quality augmented video back to the user, but it also requires low latency 
since the user must perceive delay been their own physical actions and the 
impact on their perceived, but artificially created reality. Another example
is the vehicular communications where the communications traffic interfaces to
the vehicle control system and may have a direct bearing on road safety.

## Rapid Deployment

Rapid deployment and the rapid introduction of new services is a
development goal of the providers of all types of current Internet
service, and it becomes more important when various service of
vertical industries in 5G will be deployed in the network.  There is
ongoing work such as network orchestration, software defined networks
and network function vitalization that aims to address this in fixed
networks.  Whether the development work being pursued to address
rapid deployment of fixed network services is sufficient to address
the new services requirement of 5G is for further study.

## Resource Multiplexing and Isolation

The key to the economic success of the Internet is the amortization
of cost over a diverse set of users and a diverse set of user
applications each with different network requirements.  The need for
varying degrees of isolation demanded by the 5G applications suggests
that whilst some of these needs may be met by the existing techniques
that have been developed over the years, such as VPNs, these
techniques will require enhancement to satisfy the requirements of
some of the proposed 5G applications.  For example, industrial
control and car control applications have both operational
correctness and safety concerns which introduce requirements for
greater isolation (static and dynamic) on the design of the network.

Achieving the correct balance between multiplexing and isolation is
important in  meeting both the service requirements and the need for network
operational efficiency.


## Automation

There are two aspects of automation that require consideration, the problem
of network planning and operation, and the problem of run-time operation.

The modern desire is for the configuration of the network to be driven
by those familiar with web tools rather than those familiar with
the detail of network configuration, and thus for there to be a
seamless interface from those processing customer orders through to
the deployment of service to the customers. Economics drive this need
in "ordinary" networking. Network slicing enhances the need for this
in several dimensions, firstly the frequency of reconfiguration
is expected to grow as customers buy capacity and other capabilities
in smaller increments for shorter periods of time. Secondly the 
number of sub-networks is expected to grow. Thirdly the complexity
of the characteristics of the network will grow with the addition
of demand for resources dedicated to the customer. Clearly the 
new characteristics such as the concept of the slice itself with its
dedicated resources will demand enhancements to the system that
plans, provisions and configures the network will require enhancements
to the automation of the network. The increased scale of the network
and the rate of change of the configuration are likely more demanding
than is needed to support existing networks. Whether these changes
are fundamental or require a re-think of the existing approach is for 
further study, but fundamentally is more of a design and implementation
issue than an architectural change.

In terms of the run-time operation of the network there is already
a strong desire to automate this. The issue with network slicing is
a matter of scale, and the degree to which faults in the underlay
are propagated up to the system operating the slice, and the manner
in which this happens.


## Business Model

It is anticipated that 5G operation will involve new business models, with
low overhead fast provisioning of new services. This is also the trajectory
of fixed networks. Whilst 5G networks will have some specialist components
it would be advantageous if common customer interfaces, provisioning and
management systems evolved.


## Fixed-Mobile Convergence

The network architectures of fixed and mobile networks as currently
deployed are quite different. For example voice and data are
handled differently, billing, detailed usage records and the regulatory
framework for thing such as lawful intercept are quite different.
The goal is that that a common technical infrastructure can satisfy the 
needs of both fixed network usage and mobile network usage from 
both and application and delivery perspective.

# The Network Slicing Concept

The network slicing concept is that a network slice provider has
network resource, compute resources and storage resources can
allocate a portion of these to build a logical dedicated network for
each customer, so that the diverse requirements of different
customers can be met in the same physical network.  Allocation is
temporary and can be increased or decreased at any time according to
the requirements of the customer to whom they are allocated.  Thus
the network is sliced up into separate network slice instances
(NSIs).

From the perspective of a network slice instance (NSI), the underlay 
is thus a reservoir of the network, compute and storage resources, 
some fraction of which are temporarily allocated  to the NSI.
The compute and storage resources include the resources present
on the routers used by the NSI as well as such resources used by
network functions, SDN controllers, telemetry systems etc.

The critical difference between slicing and existing virtualization
concepts is that in network slicing the shared resources can be
allocated in such a way that they are dedicated to the service of the
customer buying the use of the NSI, so that different services can
always obtain their required network characteristics with the network
slice without being impacted by other services in the network.


## An Example of Network Slicing

In this section we expand on the concept of network slicing a little further.

    NSI 1
    A-----X----Y------SF1-----SF2-------B
               |
               Z------SF3---------------C

    NSI 2
    D-----X----Y------SF1-----SF4-------E
               |
               Z------SF3---------------F
{: #NSE title="Example of Network Slicing"}


{{NSE}} shows two network slice instances. In one NSI A, B and C
are edge nodes in the network and exchange traffic through
routers X, Y and Z. Some of this traffic is subject to in network
processing through service functions SF1, SF2 and SF3. In 
the other NSI nodes D, E and F are edge nodes in the network
and exchange traffic through nodes X, Y and Z. Some of this traffic
is subject to in network processing through service functions
SF1, SF4 and SF3. 

Each group of ingress/egress nodes: A, B and C and D, E and F think they are in
disjoint networks from the other group. There is no test that they
can perform that will indicate otherwise. However X, Y and Z and
the links joining them are the same nodes and links. Furthermore
X, Y and Z are unaware of their alter ego, and run ships in the night
routing and other protocols.

Similarly
Each instance of SF1 and SF3 is executing the same service functions operating on the same
hardware, but neither instance of SF1 and SF3 is aware of the other.
Similarly SF2 and SF4 may execute on the same hardware but neither
is aware of the other and is unable to detect the presence of the 
other.

A, B and C, and D, E and F have different slices of the network, in 
a technology know as Network Slicing.

Where neither group is able to run any test (static or dynamic) to determine
the presence of the other group this is hard network slicing. In a hard
network slice each network slice is granted network and computing resources
that are private to it for its exclusive use. There can be no amortization
of resources, and no over provisioning other than withing the slice for use
by the slice. The users of the slice pay the full overhead costs of the 
resources they buy from the network slice provider.

An alternative model, much more akin to Virtual Private Networks is 
soft network slicing, where the typologies are isolated from the point
of view of not being able to exchange information between each other, but
they share resources in a way that does not provide full dynamic isolation.
Thus if one party consumes excess link bandwidth, excess compute resource, or
their routers need to perform a lot of resources dues to a network action, the
slices sharing those resources will experience a reduction in capacity. 
With soft network slicing over provisioning may be utilized allowing better
amortization of costs among st the users and hence lower operating costs.

It is fundamental to network slicing that slices may be created, the 
topology and/or its resources modified, and that the slices may be 
decommissioned in
a timely manner with minimum work by the network provider or the customer.
This is not however unique to network slicing, it is a goal of 
modern classical networks to be able to do this.

# Network Slicing Architecture

This section describes the overall architecture of network slicing in
the fixed transport network.  Note that the end-to-end 5G network
slicing consists of the slicing of the radio network, the fixed
transport network and the mobile core network, while the slicing of
radio network and mobile core are out of the scope of this document.

                           +---------------------+
                           |     Third Party     |
                           +----------+----------+
                                      |
                          +-----------+------------+
                          |    E2E Slice Manager   |
                          +-/-------------------\--+
                           /                     \
                          /                       \
        +----------------/-----+             +-----\----------------+
        | Domain Slice Manager |<----------->| Domain Slice Manager |
        +--------+-+-+---------+             +-------+-+-+----------+
                 | | |                               | | |
           +-----|-|-+------------+           +------|-|-+----------+
        +--+-----|-+-----------+  |        +--+------|-+----------+ |
     +--+--+-----+----------+  |  |     +--+--+------+---------+  | |
     |                      |  +--+     |                      |  +-+
     |                      +--+        |                      +--+
     | Logical Network Slice|           | Logical Network Slice|
     +----------------------+           +----------------------+
    +-------------------------------+    +-------------------------------+
    |      +---+       +---+        |    |    +---+   +---+   +---+      |
    |      |   |       |   |        |    |    |   |   |   |   |   |      |
    |      +---+       +---+        |    |    +---+   +---+   +---+      |
    |                               |    |                               |
    | +---+  +---+  +---+  +---+    |    | +---+  +---+  +---+  +---+    |
    | |   |  |   |  |   |  |   |    |    | |   |  |   |  |   |  |   |    |
    | +---+  +---+  +---+  +---+    |    | +---+  +---+  +---+  +---+    |
    |                               |    |                               |
    |Physical Network Infrastructure|    |Physical Network Infrastructure|
    +-------------------------------+    +-------------------------------+
{: #NSA title="Network Slicing Architecture"}

{{NSA}} shows the high level network slicing architecture.
It consists of several components: Third Party, E2E Slice
Manager, Domain Slice Manager, logical network slices and the
physical network infrastructure.

## Third Party

The third party is the customer of the network slice, which provides
the requirements of the network slice to the slice manager.  It can
be either the user of the network slice, or a particular service
provider which provide it own services based on the network slices.

## Slice Manager

Slice manager is responsible for the life cycle management of the
network slices.  It creates, updates and decommission the network
slice according to the requirement from the third party.  In multi-
domain networks, each domain can have a Domain Slice Manager, and an
E2E slice manager would coordinate the domain slice managers to build
an E2E network slice.

## Logical Network Slices

A logical network slice provides the customized virtual network topology 
and required connectivity between a set of network sites and a set of 
service and network functions. It forms a customized logical network 
for a particular customer or service. 

## Physical Network Infrastructure

All the network slices share the resources in the physical network 
infrastructure. The performance characteristics (such as bandwidth, 
latency, jitter, reliability) of a particular network slice is 
guaranteed by allocating appropriate physical network resources to 
the logical network slice. The physical network may support different 
methods of network resource partitioning, which may be used to provide 
different types of network slicing. 


# Data-Plane

The data-plane in the edge and core of the network will be one or more of the 
standard IETF data-planes: IPv4/6 or MPLS or possibly for multi-cast it might 
be BIER. Over the RAN however, where there is concern by some radio engineers
at the relative bloat of the IETF protocol layers. This may mean that a 
gateway function is needed for at least some of the layers in the protocol 
stack. We proceed with this architecture on the basis that the IETF protocol
stack exists as-is and any translation to and from the air interface is the
province of the radio engineers.

## Propagation of Guarantees

Guarantees of delay start at the physical layer and propagate up the 
stack layer by layer. Any layer can add delay, and can take various steps
to minimize the impact of delay on its layer, but no layer can reduce the
delay introduced by a lower layer.

Guarantees of loss and jitter can, by contrast be upheld or improved
at any layer of the protocol stack, but usually at a cost of increased 
delay. Where delay is a constrain as it is in some 5G applications the option
of trading trading delay for better loss or jitter characteristics is not an
option. In these circumstances it is critical that the quality characteristics
start at the physical layer and be maintained at each layer of the protocol
stack.

## The Underlying Physical Layer

A point to point dedicated physical channel is clearly provides the will
provide delay, jitter and loss characteristics limited only by the 
media itself. This does not fulfill the need for rapid reconfiguration
of the network to provision new services. 

To address the need to provision a slice of the data-plane one approach that
can be deployed is to time-slice access to the physical service. 
Ignoring many of the classic TDM offering as being too slow, a number of 
technologies are available that might be applied including OTN and FlexE.
Whilst the provisioning of the channel provided by underlays such as
FlexE and the interconnection of FlexE channels is within the scope of 
this architecture the operation of the underlay is outside its scope.

The logical sub-division of a physical channel be that a single channel with
the full bandwidth available or a channel multiplexed at the physical layer
such as is provided by FlexE we will consider in the following section.

## Hard vs Soft Slicing in the Data-Plane

Hard slicing refers to the provision of resources in such a way that
they are dedicated to a specific NSI. Data-plane resources are
provided in the data-plane through the allocation of a lambda, through
the allocation of a time domain multiplexed resource such as a FlexE
channel or through a service such as an MPLS hard-pipe. Note that although
hard-pipes can be used to allocate dedicated, non-stared resources to an
NSI, the using of allocation is bandwidth, which can result is more
"lumpiness" in the physical channel that would not be present with a
true physical layer multiplexing scheme.

## Logical Multiplexing of Physical Channels

Methods of logically multiplexing the data-plane over a physical channel
include various types of tunnel (IP or MPLS) or various types of pseudowire
(again IP or MPLS). Although the design of deterministic networking
techniques helps, it is not possible to achieve the same degree of
dynamic isolation with these techniques as it is possible to achieve
with pure physical layer multiplexing techniques. However where such
techniques provide sufficient isolation their use leads to a network
design that may  be deployed on existing equipment designs and which
can make unused bandwidth available to best effort traffic.


## The Role of VPNs

VPNs are a candidate technology for network slicing. The existing VPN 
technologies 
mainly focus on the isolation of forwarding tables between different tenants and 
providing virtual topology of the connectivity between the tenant sites, the 
VPN layer and the underlying tunnels are usually loosely coupled, and 
statistical 
multiplexing is adopted to improve the tunnel utilization. 

It is unclear that whether VPN along with existing underlying tunnels can 
provide the required performance and isolation for network slices of 
critical services.

## The Role of Deterministic Networking

Deterministic networking is a technology under development in the 
IETF that aims to both minimize congestion loss and set an upper
bound on per hop latency. It allows a packet layer to emulate 
the behaviour of a fully partitioned underlay such might be provided
through some physical layer multiplexing system such as FlexE.

Deterministic networking works by policing the ingress rate 
of a flow to an agreed maximum and then scheduling the transmission time
of each flow to reduce the "lumpiness" and hence the possible
buildup of queues and hence congestion loss. 

Whilst deterministic networking is not as perfect as physical layer
multiplexing in terms of latency minimization, because the scheduling
is hop by hop and not end to end meaning that at each hop a packet has
to wait for the transmission slot allocated to its flow, it has the 
advantage that it is able to allocate slots not needed by the allocated 
traffic to best effort traffic. This reallocation of the unused transmission
slots to background traffic significantly improves the efficiency of
the network by amortizing the cost between the scheduled high priority
users and the best effort users.

## Dynamic Re provisioning

A requiremnet of the network slicing system is that it can be dynamically and
non-disruptively reprovisioned. That is not an unusual requirement of a modern
network. However the frequency of reprovisioning will be realtively high, such
that it in many cases it is not possible to hide any disruption during a "quiet"
time.

Physical multiplexing methods such as FlexE have the ability to seemlessly 
reprovision multiplex slots. At the network layer techniques such as 
make-before-break, segment routing, and loop-free-convergence can be used to
provide uninterupted operation during a topology change. 

The dynamic re-provisioning of the control plane and service functions is for 
further study.


# The Control Plane

The Control plane plays an important role in network slicing. It creates 
multiple network slices with diverse requirements dynamically according to 
the collected resource and capabilities of the physical network. With the 
progress of software defined networking, the control plane of network 
slicing would comply with the SDN architecture, while still using
distributed control protocols when it is necessary or proved to have 
advantages. Existing protocols in each layer will be reused as much as possible.

# SDN

To be provided in a future version.

# Service Functions

Service functions are  provided using the techniques being developed by the 
IETF Service Function Chaining Working Group. 

Service Functions are normally virtualized and are executed on general purpose
compute platforms. The ability of the common compute platforms to meet the 
exacting rquiremnets of network slicing is for further study.

# OAM

To be provided in a future version.

# Telemetry

To be provided in a future version.

# Network Sslice Recursion

The desire by some users planning to use network slicing is to be able to network
slice a network slice that they have purchased from their provider. There are
two ways in which this can be provided. One method that might be used is to literally 
sub-divide the slice into smaller slices by introducing an additional level of encapsulation,
which might be as simple as pushing an additional MPLS label. They would
also need to virtualize the compute resourses that had been purchased.  
Another method that might be considerd is to
provide an interface to the slice manager that allows a user to create and remove slices
within an agreed total slice resource budget.

The first method deligates slice control and lifecycle management to the user in a way
that is largely opaque to the provider. However it has the property that all of the smaller
slices will  have the same guaranteed properties regardless of whether they need them or not.

The second method has the property that the user can request bespoke properties for each
mini-slice. This has economic and flexibility advantages. It is cheaper because the user
only purchases what they need. It is flexible because the user can upgrade to a service
with other properties (strickter guarantees, higher bandwidth etc) should the need 
arise without needing to migrate their existing service.

One property that the first is that if the user wishes to share control information between
the slices under their control this is relatively easy whereas the second method would been
a gateway. Depending on the ammount of shared state a gateway may represent a bottleneck.


# Security Considerations

Each layer of the system has its own security requirements. 

# IANA Considerations

This document makes no requests of IANA.


 

