---
coding: utf-8

title: Network Slicing Architecture
abbrev: Netslice arch
docname: draft-bryant-netslice-arch
wg: No Working Group
category: info

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, comments]

author:
  -
       ins: S. Bryant
       name: Stewart Bryant
       org: Huawei
       email: stewart.bryant@gmail.com
  -
       ins: A. Author
       name: Another Author
       org: Their Affiliation
       email: a.author@example.com


normative:
  RFC2119:

informative:
  
--- abstract

This is an abstract abstract

--- middle

# Introduction 


# Requirements Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
{{RFC2119}}.

# Definition Terms

# Objectives of Network Slicing

In this section we provide an overview of the objectives of network slicing to 
provide context for the network slicing architecture.
 
## Service Diversity

The Internet has always been designed to support a diverse set of services.
However the aims of 5G stretch this diversity in a mumber of dimensions. 
5G aims to provide an enhanced mobile Broaband service, providing the user with
the network services needed to support high definition video, virtual reality
augmented reality and tigher integration between fixed and mobile services 
known as fixed mobile convergence (FMC). High bandwidth is not a particular 
challenge in the Internet, but to do so with at least one of the hosts highly 
mobile is a challange that requires technical consideration. 

Some of the services that are invisioned for 5G such as vehicular control, be
that the co-ordination of self driving cars or the control of airborne devices
such as drone require low latency. Most Internet protocols are designed around
a best effort, or enhanced best effort paradigm, although recent work
on deterministic networking aims to improve the situation by providing a 
ceiling on latency and a significant improvement in packet loss rate for
deterministic services. The added dimension of end-point mobility to support
5G further stretches these requirements.

The Internet of things brings with it the concept of massive Machine Type 
Communications. This results in communications device densities and population
sizes that exceed those to which the core Internet protocols were originally
designed to support.

Economy of scale, a driver of the economic sucess of the Internet, leads 
us in the direction of trying to ammortize the network and its infrastructure 
across this diverse set if requirements, but the extent of the divesity is 
such that one size does not fit all.

The purpose of network slicing is to ammortize what we can, without 
compromizing on the critical performance requirements needed by the 
application requirements, by providing a bespoke or pseudo-bespoke 
network to each application domain over a common infrastructure.

## Guarenteed Performance

There are exacting latancy demands required to service the needs
of a number of target applications. Augmented reality for example requires
high bandwidth to provide a local video feed to the augmenter, and high 
quality augmented video back to the user, but it also requires low latency 
since the user must perceive delay been their own physical actions and the 
impact on their perceived, but artificially created reality.

## Rapid Deployment

Rapid deployment and the rapid introduction of new services is a development
goal of the providers of current Internet service providers of all types.
There is ongoing work such as network orchestration, software defined networks
and network function virtualization that aims to address this in fixed networks.
A mobile network has the additional challange of providing the required
radio systems and their associated infrastructure. Whether the develpement
work being persued to address rapid deployment of fixed network services is
sufficient to address the needs of the mobile network or whether the 
addition of mobility requires additional development of the techiques being
used to address this problem in the fixed network space is for further study. 

## Resource Multiplexing and Isolation

The key to the economic success of the Internet is the ammortization
of cost over a diverse set of users and a diverse set of user applications
each with diferent network requirements. The need for varying degress
of both static and dynamic isolation demanded by the proposed applications
of 5G suggests that whilst some of these needs may be met by the existing
techniques that have been developed over the years, such as VPNs, these
techniques will require enhancement to satisfy the requirements of some of the 
proposed 5G applications, not the least of which is mobility.

## Automation



## Buiness Model

It is anticipated that 5G operation will involve new business models, with
low overhead fast provisioning of new services. Whilst a number of additional
components will need to be provisioned, this is not substantially different
to a longstanding goal with fixed networks. This whilst this needs to be
placed in the architecture, and interfaces to new components will be needed no
fundamentally new work is anticipated.


## Fixed-Mobile Convergence

# Objectives of this Architecture

## Common Infrastructure
## On-demand Customization
## Issolation
## Determinism
## Scalability
## OAM Exposure
## Multi-operator

# Structure of the Architecture

## End-to-end Data Path



## End-to-end Data Path Support

## Per-Slice resources

## Provisioning of the Per-Slice Resources

## Management of the Per-Slice Resources

## High Level Customer Interface

# The Network Slicing Concept



# The Data-Plane

The data-plane in the edge and core of the network will be one or more of the 
standard IETF data-planes: IPv4/6 or MPLS or possibly for multicast it might 
be BIER. Over the RAN however, where there is concern by some radio engineers
at the relative bloat of the IETF protocol layers. This may mean that a 
gateway function is needed for at least some of the layers in the protocol 
stack. We proceed with this architecture on the basis that the IETF protocol
stack exists as-is and any translation to and from the air interface is the
province of the radio engineers.

## Propagation of Guarantees

Guarantees of delay start at the physical layer and propagate up the 
stack layer by layer. Any layer can add delay, and can take various steps
to minimise the impact of delay on its layer, but no layer can reduce the
delay introduced by a lower layer.

Guarantees of loss and jitter can, by contrast be upheld or improved
at any layer of the protocol stack, but usually at a cost of increased 
delay. Where delay is a constrain as it is in some 5G applications the option
of trading trading delay for better loss or jitter characteristics is not an
option. In these circumstances it is critical that the quality characteristics
start at the phy later and be maintained at each layer of the protccol stack.

## The Underlying Phy

A point to point dedicated physical channel is clearly provides the will
provide delay, jitter and loss characteristics limited only by the 
media itself. This does not fulfil the need for rapid reconfiguration
of the network to provision new services. 

To address the need to provision a slice of the data-plane one approach that
can be deployed is to time-slice access to the physical service. 
Ignoring many of the classic TDM ofering as being too slow, a number of 
technologies are available that might be applied including OTN and FlexE.
Whilst the provisioning of the channel provided by underlays such as
FlexE and the interconenction of FlexE channels is within the scope of 
this architecture the operation of the underlay is outside its scope.

The logical sub-divsion of a physical channel be that a single channel with
the full bandwidth available or a channel multiplexed at the physical layer
such as is provided by FlexE we will consider in the following section.

## Logical Multiplexing of Physical Channels

## The Role of VPNs

## The Role of Determinstic Networking

## Hard vs Soft Slicing in the data-plane

## Dynamic Reprovisioning

# OAM

# The Network Layer Control Plane

## Distributed Control Planes

## SDN

# Service Functions

# The Transport Layer

# Provisioning

# Life-cycle Management


# Privacy Considerations

Privacy text

# Security Considerations

Security Text

# IANA Considerations

This document makes no IANA requests. 




